= dir_validate gem

== Synopsis

  require 'dir_validator'
  dv = DirValidator.new('some/path')
  dv.dirs('blah', :pattern => '*').each do |subdir|
    # More validations.
  end
  dv.report()


== Overview

This gem provides a convenient syntax for checking whether the contents of a
directory structure match your expectations.

The best place to start is by reading through the runnable introduction in
bin/readme_demo.rb.

The public API for the gem is fairly simple. First you set up the validator by
passing in the path to the directory structure that you want to check.

  require 'dir_validator'
  dv = DirValidator.new('some/path')

Then you set up your expectations regarding the content of the directory
structure. This is done by invoking the four methods used to declare
particular validations: 

  dirs()
  files()
  dir()
  file()

The validation methods use the following syntax:

  dirs(VID, OPTS)

  # where VID  = The validation identifier.
  #              Can be any string meaningful to the user.
  #              Used when reporting warnings.
  #
  #       OPTS = A hash of options to set up expectations regarding
  #              the names of files or directory as well as their
  #              quantity.

The plural validation methods return an array of DirValidator::Item objects.
The singular variants return one such object (or nil). The returned objects are
those that (a) meet the criteria specified in the OPTS hash, and (b) have not
been matched already by prior validations.

The validation criteria defined in the OPTS hash come in three general types:

* Name-related criteria affect whether a particular DirValidator::Item will be
  returned (only if its file or directory name matches the criteria). You can
  supply one of the following:

    :name     # A literal string.
    :re       # A regular expression, supplied as either a Regexp or String.
    :pattern  # A glob-like pattern. Supports only the * and ? wildcards.

* Quantity assertions. These control the maximum number of DirValidator::Item
  objects that will be returned. They also generate a warning if too few are
  found.

    :n   # A string in one of the following forms:
         #     '*'         Zero or more.
         #     '+'         One or more.
         #     '?'         Zero or one.
         #     'n+'        n or more
         #     'n'         Exactly n.
         #     'm-n'       m through n, inclusive.

* Other attributes:

    :recurse  # Boolean.
              # Normally, validation methods find only the immediate
              # children of the object upon which the method is called. If
              # this option is true, items deeper in the hierarchy can be
              # discovered. For example, given this content:
  
              # some/path/
              #   foo/
              #     bar/
              #       foo/

              # And this validator.
              dv = DirValidator.new('some/path')

              # This call would return only the 'foo' directory.
              dv.dirs('a', :re => /foo$/)

              # Whereas this call would return both 'foo' and 'foo/bar/foo'.
              dv.dirs('a', :re => /foo$/, :recurse => true)

After the validations have been defined, you can examine the results programmatically:

  dv.validate()
  dv.warnings.each do |w|
    puts w.vid
    puts w.opts.inpsect
  end

More commonly, you can print the information contained in the warnings in the form
of a basic CSV repot.

  dv.report()

The warnings and the CSV report contain the following information:

  vid       # Validation identifier, as discussed above.
  got       # N of items found.
  n         # A normalized version of the :n optionn discussed above.
  base_dir  # The parent directory of the item.
  name      # The name-related options discussed above.
  re        #  "
  pattern   #  "
  path      # The path of the item.


== Known issues

Currently handles only regular files and directories.


== Releases

- 0.0.1 initial release


== Running tests

  bundle exec rspec spec


== Generating documentation

To generate documentation into the doc folder:

  yard doc


== Copyright

Copyright © 2012 Stanford University Library. See LICENSE for details.
